I just get so tired of the idea that
progressives have gone too far. We are
facing um such horrific brutality that
politeness is not really the problem.
>> [music]
>> Change can feel overwhelming, and we're
living through an era of huge changes,
widespread democratic backsliding,
massive technological [music]
disruption, and the ongoing slow-motion
disaster of the climate crisis.
But what if there was a different and
more hopeful story to tell about all of
this upheaval?
That's the question at the heart of The
Beginning Comes After the End, a new
book by [music] the critically acclaimed
writer Rebecca Solnit.
Solnit takes the long view on progress,
[music] offering a more optimistic
interpretation of change. It's not a
naive book. Instead, it provides [music]
a stabilizing counterweight to the
feeling that the world of late has spun
dangerously off kilter.
Here's my conversation with Rebecca
Solnit.
>> [music]
>> You know, Rebecca, it's it's a real
pleasure for me to speak to you, in part
because A Field Guide to Getting Lost
was a really big book for me, and I read
it not long after I had moved from my
home in Toronto [snorts]
to New York City, and it just it felt
like a a real uh companion at the time.
And all just the way it captured the
feeling of um
or the idea that like displacement
or or and a kind of solitude
can actually be
a positive things. So, thank you for
that. I'm so glad you found it at the
right time for you. And yeah, that book,
we just put out a 20th anniversary
edition, and I got to spend some time
revisiting it and rethinking what the
hell it was I was doing in the early
2000s with it, and it's been really
interesting. I wrote that book, and then
I wrote Hope in the Dark, and I thought
like, am I schizophrenic? These books
are so different. And then I realized
that Hope in the Dark, which is very
political and very upbeat, and A Field
Guide to Getting Lost, which is
introspective and kind of melancholy,
were both about coming to terms with
uncertainty.
But, of course, I also wrote A Field
Guide to Getting Lost,
as I do a lot of my books, to kind of
react against something happening in the
culture. And something that was already
happening with tech was the idea that we
want to live in a safe, circumscribed,
known world. We don't want to leave the
house without knowing exactly where
we're going. This sense that we need to
be in control, that we need to know
everything. And of course, we're never
completely in control, and we never
completely know everything. So,
how do we look at it in a way that lets
us accept it and maybe work with it
instead of deny it or work against it?
What in the culture would you say your
new book is reacting against? Really, a
kind of cultural amnesia. I think of
time
in increments of a year, 5 years, 50
years, centuries.
And across that time span, you can
really see how profoundly the world has
changed and is changing. You can see
that these good things and, you know,
feminism, civil rights movements,
environmental awareness, indigenous
resurgences have had a profound impact.
So often, people seem to think in these
[snorts] very short-term intervals in
which they either think nothing has
changed or they just see the last bad
thing that happened and think we're
losing. So, context is everything. And I
often feel that a lot of
pessimism, despair, doomerism comes from
not knowledge about the future, even
though they think they're thinking about
the future, but from lack of knowledge
about the past. Despair and amnesia go
hand in hand, and so do hope and memory,
I think in many cases.
So, when when people are are reading the
news or or thinking about changes from
day to day or month to month or even
year to year and it's making them feel
like they're just barreling into a grim
dystopian future.
What what else should they be thinking
about or what additional context should
they have uh that would help them
complete the picture and and and show
them that there you know, there are
these deeper currents of positive
change. I think even the right tells us
something if we listen very carefully to
what they're saying, something very
encouraging. They tell us
you all are very powerful. You've
changed the world profoundly. All these
things that are often treated
separately, feminism, queer rights,
environmental and climate action,
ideas of equality, etc. are actually all
connected. So, they're basically telling
us we're incredibly successful,
which is the good news. The bad news is
they hate it and they want to change it
all back. So much of what we're seeing
with Trumpism,
with the far-right resurgence or surge
right now
is a fury at how the world has been
changing a desire to change it back, to
put women back, you know, kind of
barefoot, pregnant, and in the kitchen,
to recreate racial hierarchies that have
been dismantled to some extent, to you
know, impose mandatory Christianity,
mandatory um heterosexuality, to punish
difference, and to deregulate protecting
the environment, for which you also have
to pretend that there are no
consequences to destroying the climate,
uh polluting rivers,
um destroying the natural world, etc.
and pretend that we're not connected,
and it's an anti-connection ideology.
And so, there is a backlash. It is
significant,
but it is not comprehensive or her
I was on book tour last year in Europe
and the Europeans kind of astounded me
by being like, "Oh, Roe v. Wade was
overturned. Doesn't that mean feminism
has failed?" And I was like,
"The United States is 4% of the
population. Meanwhile, all these
Catholic countries, Argentina, Mexico,
Ireland, and Spain have greatly expanded
reproductive rights and abortion
access."
>> [gasps]
>> And even though overturning of Roe v.
Wade just took away the national
protection, a lot of blue states
strengthened it. You know, so it's
really how you tell the story and
there's a lot of different ways to tell
it.
So, I always want to give people these
broader perspectives, these deeper
perspectives, this equipment for
understanding change
in ways that empowers them to to see it,
to understand it, and to participate in
it in ways I think you can't with the
short-term perspectives.
Do
Do you think progressive change is
inevitable?
I think nothing is inevitable,
but I do think the word evitable should
be used if we're going to use
inevitable.
In some ways, everything is evitable.
We're deciding in the present what the
future will be and I think there's a lot
of strengths and tendencies, but
>> [snorts]
>> recognizing that the future does not
exist really dismantles a lot of
defeatism, despair, doomerism,
cynicism,
which often pretend to know what the
future can and can't be as a way of
pretending to a power they don't really
have while abandoning the power we
really do have, which is to make
a future that doesn't exist exist yet in
the present. And I've spent my life
listening to people talk about what can
and can't happen and usually not coming
back to apologize when it turns out that
actually Donald Trump can be elected,
same-sex marriage is going to pass, we
are going to stop the Keystone pipeline.
And sometimes when I want to be kind of
an I'm like, "Wow, do you bet
on the horses cuz you seem to be really
good at knowing the future." You know, I
was I was just reading an essay by this
writer named George Scialabba. I think
he's one of the best political writers
in in America, but he he in this essay
was pointing out that
you know, there there can be a kind of
value in
certain forms of social conservatism
that um
you know, sort of maintaining certain
cultural or religious traditions. You
know, it helps with social stability. It
helps with sort of inculcating
large-scale trust
among groups of people.
But the problem he in this essay was
pointing out is when those traditions
are based in illusions. It's like an
illusion could be the the authority of
white men or that a certain kind of
Christian morality is the only valid
kind of morality or that
you know, one's country can do no wrong.
But my question is how how do we promote
stability and solidarity
in the absence of the old illusions?
I think that there are some really deep
cultural traditions that are worth
keeping, some of which are
older than Christianity and
one of the really magnificent things I
see happening in the United States right
now is the recovery of some of the
really old stories. And so I feel like
part of the future,
the best future we aim for is built by
going back to the oldest stories, back
to recognizing that patriarchy is not
inevitable or natural or the only way
people have ever done things.
That there are in indigenous cultures
the Americas and Asian and African
cultures that are matriarchal
traditions. A lot of hunter-gatherers
just seem to have a lot more gender
equality.
>> [gasps]
>> So, I think you can move forward with
anchors in a deeper past
and hope for a kind of stability and a
deeper relationship
to um the old stories and the past. But,
why is it that
it it feels so much easier to
internalize the upsetting aspects
of the the retrogressive aspects of the
world we live in
uh rather than the more
positive context. You know, it's like
we're we're more drawn to to to pay
attention to the to the fire
uh than to the uh the place where
there's where there's calm. I think I
think you under- you understand where
I'm getting what I'm getting out of this
question. I do, and in some ways you're
coming to the wrong person. My friend
>> [laughter]
>> Sam calls me the hope lady,
and I am, you know, I remain hopeful and
and, you know, partly as defiance. They
would like us to surrender, to feel
powerless, that there's nothing we can
do. But, I think the evidence speaks to
that. I think part of it
that you're addressing is
narrative itself.
Um most stories are something goes
wrong, and then we have to address it.
And when nothing goes wrong, there's
literally no story. You walk through the
jungle and the flowers are beautiful,
but you better keep an eye on the tiger
cuz the flowers aren't going to eat you,
but the tiger will. You've got to keep
an eye on what's wrong. But, also I
think a lot of the stories of what's
right are these stories of incremental
change. And one of the stories I feel
people don't really comprehend is the
energy revolution at the turn of the
millennium.
We didn't really have an alternative to
fossil fuel, which is part of why so
many people are still stuck in a kind of
austerity of con- of energy consumption,
which is a good thing.
But, because
solar and wind have suddenly become
these incredibly cheap, incredibly
effective, adaptable technologies, we
can run almost everything on Earth on
renewables, have more energy than we
could possibly use. And that's such an
incremental story, I feel like very few
people comprehend it because
it's nerdy, it's technical, and it's
really about something very incremental.
I need to reveal my party pooper
attitude about uh renewable energy or
clean energy. Um which it's clearly
there's a comfort in knowing that
clean energy is the future. But, at at
the same time, you know, the United
States is producing it's pumping more
oil than ever before.
Our global climate temperature increase
targets, you know, we're going to blow
past them. We have no idea what the sort
of uh feedback loop effects of uh rising
temperature, what those effects will be
or how how bad they'll get. So, what
while there is a comfort in knowing what
our shared energy future is, it can feel
like a cold comfort to me.
Well, cold is good in the climate
movement.
That's true.
You know, I mean, you talk about
comfort, I am not comfortable with where
we're at. I am a climate activist, I
donate a bunch, I do a bunch of work.
The wonder and horror
for climate is that the great majority
of people on Earth support climate
action. They want to see their
governments implement it. They want to
see the world around them change to a
more climate-friendly world, whether
it's around transportation, urban
design,
agriculture, etc.
The obstacles are not technological,
uh they're not, you know, they're
political, and a minority
of vested interests, the fossil fuel
industry and the the rich and powerful
and governmental figures who either are
or serve the fossil fuel industry are
what's holding us back.
And so the wonder and horror exist side
by side. That's part of the complexity I
try and embrace. You can be
thrilled by all the things that are
happening and horrified by all the
things that should be happening but
aren't.
And so essentially everything we can
save is worth saving, everything we can
do is worth doing, every tenth of a
degree we can prevent of temperature
rise
is
you know, saves places, species, um
communities, etc. So, you know, what I
want people to do is to hold both truths
that there's so much we can do, there's
so much we're losing. What we do now
matters. It's not too late. Of course
we're going to lose a lot. We've already
lost a lot, but we don't have to lose
everything and we don't have to
surrender.
You got me all worked up.
>> [laughter]
>> I feel like it probably didn't take that
much, but
>> [gasps]
>> You know, I'm just passionate about
these things. They are so worth doing.
It is so not over.
>> [gasps]
>> And we don't know what's going to happen
next. And I was so shaped by
the 1989 revolutions on Tiananmen
Square. Ultimately was a tragedy,
although it may have sown some seeds, we
don't know.
>> [snorts and gasps]
>> But
I went back and read a bunch of the
media in the English-speaking world in
the sort of spring and summer of 1989.
>> [gasps]
>> Nobody foresaw that all that unrest in
East Germany, Poland, Hungary,
Czechoslovakia,
the other Eastern European countries was
going to amount to much or they just
thought it was going to be chaos, which,
you know, um governmental people are
always afraid of. The fact that they
would topple totalitarianism
across that whole swath of
Soviet-dominated Eastern Europe largely
non-violently almost all at once in
October and November
was really inconceivable. And I think it
was inconceivable to the people who did
it. And knowing that we don't know is a
really important kind of knowledge
because pretending you do know when you
don't
is stupid and misleading and something I
wish a few more people would apologize
to more for about all these all these
things that were never going to happen
or were inevitable that you know, that
turned out not to be quite that way. You
know, if we're talking about um sort of
counter-narratives
uh that can lead to positive change. I
think one of a the defining
counter-narratives of the last few
years, you know, could could loosely
fall under the umbrella of you know, the
the resistance or um
you know, another thing that is related
in some ways might be called wokeism.
And I would like to hear your
perspective on whether any of the
strategies or tactics
uh against Trump and Trumpism have maybe
been counterproductive.
Cuz I I wonder if
you know, calling him in the movement
you know,
fascist uh
sexist, racist uh
almost regardless of of whether or not
an individual thinks that those
terms are are legitimately applicable
has has sort of pushed people into their
respective corners and and maybe
alienated people who
you know, might otherwise be brought
into the progressive fold. So, do do you
think there have been any sort of
missteps over the last 10 years in terms
of And that's the least of our problems.
I mean, they are racist, they are
authoritarian, they are misogynist, they
are homophobic,
and tiptoeing around it protects them
and not the targets of the hatred and
discrimination.
I just get so tired of the idea that
progressives have gone too far in
asserting that like every human being
deserves human rights when people are
being shot in the streets of Minnea-
Minneapolis. We are facing um such
horrific brutality
and that politeness is not really the
problem to start with. I think we got
into this situation in part by a lot of
people in the mainstream thinking it was
more important to be nice and polite
uh than [snorts] call things by their
true names. Like
this is really extreme stuff. If we need
to use extreme language to describe it,
let's be truthful, let's be accurate,
and let's be bold.
Uh there's a wonderful historian,
scholar of non-violence named George
Lakey Lakey who says polarization is
good. That's when you have clarity.
Sometimes people have to pick sides. And
um
>> [snorts]
>> you know
I you do not
get authoritarians to behave better by
being meek and gentle and polite. You
get it by being strong.
I
I'd like to
>> Thank you for asking.
>> [laughter]
>> No, thank you for answering. I I want to
um
switch uh
subjects uh for for a minute. Um
you you got a lot of attention for your
uh for your book Men Explain Things to
Me, which I think was published 2014 um
Yes. adapted from uh an essay you wrote
that that went viral. Uh an essay that
sort of was was credited with helping
popularize the term mansplaining, even
though that I think the term does not a-
it's not appear in the essay, but was
there anything about that book or that
essay that you know, you think got lost
somewhere
along the path to to virality?
Yeah. No, I wrote the essay in 2008 and
eight after joking for years that I was
going to write an essay called Men
Explain Things to Me.
And you never really know what you're
doing as a writer in terms of you don't
know
how the audience will respond, which is
one of the glories of it. You know, at
least for me, I don't know. And it went
super viral then. It got sent around in
a bunch of interesting ways. But what I
find a little disturbing is that people
love to tell the original anecdote over
and over, which had to happen in 2003
when I was passing through
swanky Aspen, Colorado and got taken to
the swanky party full of swanky people
in the swanky hotel. Sounds swanky.
Yeah.
And you know, not my scene.
When [snorts] I we were trying to leave
the party and he sat us down and
said, "So, I hear you've read I hear
you've written a few books." And I'd
written seven and it like the most
recent and it "What are they about?" He
said the most recent one was about
Eadweard Muybridge, the photographer
whose revolutionary technologies
laid the groundwork for the birth of
cinema.
>> [gasps]
>> And he said, "Oh, have you read about
the very important Muybridge book that
had just come out?" And it turned out to
be mine. It's a very funny anecdote.
It's also should be a horrifying
anecdote about how deeply not listened
to women are. But the next anecdote in
that book is about a woman running
screaming out of her house in the middle
of the night
saying that her husband is trying to
kill her and a nuclear physicist, the
uncle of
my boyfriend in my 20s,
told me that anecdote and thought it was
funny because he firmly believed in his
upper middle class nuclear physicist
suburb men do not try to kill their
wives but women are crazy.
And men kill their wives all the time
including in upper middle class white
suburbs and women die all the time of
not being believed whether they say that
you know, something's going on with
their body, they need medical care or
they say a man's trying to kill them and
nobody talks about that anecdote which I
think is actually much more important.
So I felt that the enormity of the
situation really got underestimated when
everybody
um enjoyed telling that opening anecdote
and I don't regret the way I wrote it. I
wrote it in one sitting one morning
because that anecdote really kind of got
people's attention
but I just wish people would kind of
hold the whole thing rather than that
opening.
I want to ask about the the
the possible limits of storytelling
because the the power of storytelling,
the transformative
transformative power of storytelling is
something that comes up in your work a
lot. And uh
again to be a a David Downer
>> [laughter]
>> you know, I I I I think we can look at
the you know, last 10 years
just to take to take a
a span of time and say hey, you know,
over the last 10 years there there has
been more
storytelling, powerful storytelling and
and powerful first-person storytelling
about any number of things whether it's
you know, uh police abuse or or um
the climate crisis or um
sexual assault uh
at the same time I think
one could plausibly argue
that despite
being awash in all this powerful
storytelling You know, the the
underlying systemic
issues that necessitate that that
storytelling
not only maybe aren't improving, but in
in some cases are perhaps getting worse.
So, do does that maybe
suggest that that storytelling
you know, is
can only be effective
within a constellation of other
strategies and tactics?
I think absolutely there have to be
other strategies and tactics. Human
beings are and we are storytelling
animals. Stories are inevitable. It's
always important to recognize that
stories can be destruct- destructive,
imprisoning. They can obscure the truth
as well as reveal the truth. There's
this period a while back when people
were kind of flouncing around with this
aren't stories wonderful? And there are
stories to justify white supremacy,
misogyny,
uh environmental destruction. The right
has its stories, which um the fact that
this regime has to lie constantly says a
lot about who they are. But yeah,
stories can be destructive. A lot of
stories can oversimplify. I do often see
the stories people on the left tell. And
the left I think is a lot of different
things, not a monolith.
As very driven by their own version of
sectarianism, grievance,
often stories of oversimplification.
Everyone in that that category was like
this and everyone in this category is
like that.
And I talk a lot about the fact that
categories are leaky and often see
one of the jobs I try and do is
just trying to give people more complex
understandings. [music] And um
So, yeah, I think the idea that stories
are these magical devices that will do
all our work for us is itself a bad
story.
But the story is often only the
beginning. When you change the story,
that doesn't fix everything, but it
often is the beginning of changing
everything else.
Uh Rebecca, thank you very much for
taking all the time to speak with me
today. I appreciate it.
That was a wild gallop. My pleasure.
On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. After my first conversation with
Rebecca, I realized maybe I'd been a bit
too negative about renewable energy. So,
I wanted [music] to revisit the topic
with her.
Rebecca, I'm happy to be speaking to you
again.
Likewise, David. What do you got for me?
You know, there there's something that I
said to you earlier that I I've been
thinking about and and want to amend. We
were talking about um
green energy transition and how how
clean energy
you know, it's it's a sort of
definitively
on the rise. Uh
and and I
sort of pessimistically said did some
like, well, but kind of
quibbling with that. And I realized I
was thinking about that. I was like,
well, that was a a stupid thing to say.
Like, obviously any sort of clean energy
transition is is to be encouraged and
every
10th of a degree of warming that we can
prevent really matters. I think I think
what got my
back up a little bit when I when we were
talking about that was
you know, this idea that somehow like
the market will solve or help solve the
climate crisis.
Even though the market is kind of the
thing that got us into the climate
crisis in the in the first place. So, I
I think that's where my
comment was coming from. And I didn't I
didn't want to come off like, you know,
like a kind of nihilist or something
like that.
Well, thank you. I figured you were just
playing devil's advocate. And yeah, I
thought about that tenth of a degree
thing.
And it's one of the complex things. And
it's I always feel like I'm asking
people to go for nuance and shades of
gray rather than black and white and the
existence of contradictions and
complexities.
You really have to hold both that
there's still a lot to hope for and
there's a lot to mourn and those things
can exist at the same time. I feel like
a lot of the trouble we get in is people
who need those all or nothing stories.
And they literally hear me too often as
saying if we're not losing everything
then surely you just said we're winning
everything and I'm never saying that.
And so you can be kind of heartbroken
and exhilarated about climate at the
same time and you know, show up and keep
doing the work which keeps getting done
with a lot of pushback including from
the current horrendous administration
here in the US.
Well, whether it's to do with
um, you know, environmental degradation
or or degradation of our politics or
degradation of of people, it really
seems to me
like the the public is is hungry for a
real
for for an individual to be some sort of
real counterweight or foil to Trump and
Trumpism. And you know, I don't know
whether that person is Zoran Momdani or
or you know, Gavin Newsom is is clearly
trying to position himself as that
person. I might be interested in in
knowing your thoughts about him. But for
whatever reason
that person has yet to be identified or
or yet to
identify themself. Why do you think that
is?
I often think one of the great
>> [gasps and sighs]
>> kind of weaknesses of our era is that we
get lone superhero movies over and over
that suggest that our big problems are
solved by mostly guys in spandex whose
superpowers ability to inflict and
endure extraordinary violence. When
actually the world mostly gets changed
through collective effort. It brings up
something really beautiful that Thich
Nhat Hanh said at some point before he
died a few years ago, which is the next
Buddha will be the Sangha. The Sangha in
Buddhist terminology is the community of
practitioners. So the idea that we don't
have to look for an individual for a
savior, for an ubermensch. Maybe the
community is the next hero. And that's
exactly what Minneapolis is.
And I think the counter to Trump always
has been and always will be civil
society.
There's all this disparagement about
wine moms and I read two things
yesterday, one from the left, one in the
New Republic about centrist despising
Trump resistance.
And those of us who are making a racket
were often coded
female as in hysterical, overwrought,
need to calm down, no big deal, etc. And
the left also, you know, was taking some
swipes at wine moms. And um you know, a
huge amount of the important work, I was
thinking about this when I woke up in
the middle of the night, is done by nice
ladies. And I think a lot of people
with platforms
and and a lot of the left wants social
change to look like, you know, the
French Revolution or Che Guevara or
something like that. And so the fact
that nice ladies actually change the
world, maybe it's about the fact that
changing the world
is more like
caregiving than it is like war.
But
too many people still expect it to look
like war. And I denigrate politicians I
don't respect as wind socks. I think a
lot of our billionaires are also wind
socks. You know, they looked liberal
when Obama was president and being
liberal got you ahead in your pursuits.
They now have become right-wing
authoritarians because the wind's
blowing in the other direction. If Trump
falls and I don't know, AOC or whatever
becomes president, their wind is going
to blow in another direction. But, um I
just want us to understand that most
most of the important change is
collective. Do you think Governor Newsom
is a wind sock?
Not exactly. I do think he's
the you know, I think he's
trying to counter Trump by
sound making fun of Trump by sounding
like Trump might have had its moment and
um
>> [snorts]
>> but it's also one of those things I'm
watching the left gear up to attack
Gavin Newsom just in case he's the
nominee in 2028 and it kind of makes my
heart sink cuz I watched people tear
down Al Gore. I watched people tear down
Hillary Clinton. I watched people tear
down Joe Biden then Kamala Harris and
there's definitely major things to
critique about every one of them.
But at the moment
when, you know, what? Like the job is to
defeat the other guy,
um
you know,
we defeat ourselves when that's what
happens.
You know, you're
I want to
go back to your new book for a second.
Yeah. So so
the new book is
it's kind of about the inevitability of
social and political change,
but there's also an inevitability to
personal change in all our lives. Mhm.
And
has there been a personal change that
you went through that affected
how you think about or respond to
bigger change in the world? I mean,
there's so many of them that it's hard
to pick out one.
I have an interesting experience every
now and again that I think a lot of
people have, um especially if you're old
enough to remember the '80s and the '90s
and let alone the '70s. You go back to
something that you remember fondly and
you find out
it's just racist or sexist or cruel in
some way that we kind of didn't notice
or have tools or language for that was
normal then that's not so normal and
acceptable now.
I mean, there's so many things. I wrote
a this book about Purple Rain,
which I loved when it came out in 1984
and tried to watch during the pandemic.
I love Prince. I love what feminist
things the movie has, but there's a lot
of
just big-time abuse of Apollonia,
Prince's love interest, that was kind of
played for laughs and normalized, um in
that movie. And I just thought, who was
I when I was in my early '20s watching
that movie
without even the language or the space
in which to feel that that stuff wasn't
okay. Because if it wasn't okay, you
were just at odds with the world. You
You know, there's kind of no place to go
with it. So, I probably just laughed
along. So, yeah, I think about, you
know, I have changed so much and my
change isn't really separate from
the social change. And And so many ways,
we've all been re-educated around so
many or educated around so many things.
Can I just ask, I'm I'm a
big Prince fan and I think there uh
there's been stuff that's come out since
he
uh died
about his treatment of women and and
also like you're suggesting
the the culture has moved in certain
ways that
cast his attitude towards women or what
seems like his attitude towards women
was in a different light. And how do you
think differently about the art of of
someone like that now?
I know really depends.
I I don't think there's a man who made
art before, if I had a wristwatch I'd
check it, you know, about 10 minutes ago
who was not
>> [gasps]
>> you know, there's
you go back a certain amount of time and
I don't know. I had a wonderful English
professor, Dr. Pellin, he used to say,
but fortunately Shakespeare hadn't read
Freud.
You know, that there is a way in which
we can't ask
people from long ago to have our values.
There's historians call it presentism.
It depends, and I think there's some
people who weren't better than their
times. Um, there were some people who
were, but some of that stuff, you know,
it's just was kind of ugly then and is
really ugly now. And it came up somehow
in conversation. I think cuz Woody Allen
is all over the Epstein papers as a good
buddy of Epstein's. The last Woody Allen
movie I saw was Manhattan. I'm exactly
the same age as the 17-year-old or
16-year-old who played his love
interest, the middle-aged slob guy's
love interest in the movie. And it
creeped me out. I knew those kind of
guys in the late '70s and they were
creepy and I was repelled and I've never
seen a Woody Allen movie since.
I I want to read a line from your
memoir, Recollections of My
Nonexistence, and
then ask you about it. So, the line is,
"Sometimes now I envy those people who
are at the beginning of the long road of
the lives they'll make, who still have
so many decisions ahead as the road
forks and forks again.
You're no longer at the beginning of the
long road of your life.
Yeah.
>> But but what's a what's a
Can you see a an exciting or or
pivotal or or momentous
decision coming?
Other than refusing to ever do another
book tour now and uh
you know
and I'm pretty happy with the path I'm
on and really I grew up with people
telling me to have low expectations for
myself.
Um my mom told me point-blank that my
writing was just a hobby when I was in
my mid-20s and that I should just glom
onto my lovely successful boyfriend
forever who I was in the process of
leaving.
My father told me the only advice he
ever gave me I think was I should be a
business major cuz I never make a living
in the humanities.
>> [gasps]
>> And I didn't really expect to quite have
the trajectory I did and so I'm kind of
thrilled with it but you always have a
little nostalgia.
Lots of points where you make decisions
and just that so many of them are ahead
of you I think is both
hugely burdensome and also really
exciting for young people. I watch them
decide
who to marry, whether to have a start a
family and how, choose their profession,
choose their major in college. I kind of
hate the way people treat your later
teens and your 20s as though it's all
light and fluffy when
it's tremendously weighted because
you're making decisions, decisions about
who are you, who are your people, what
is your life going to be about and even
though they're changeable they're often
permanent decisions. You're hitting so
many forks in the road and they're such
[music] big ones. Rebecca, thank you so
much for taking all the time to speak
with me. I I really enjoyed it and um I
appreciate that you did it. Absolute
pleasure, David. Take care.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia-Navarro. And I'm David
Marchese. And we're the hosts of The
Interview, an audio and video podcast
[music] from The New York Times. Every
week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life. Subscribe to our YouTube channel
so you'll [music] never miss an episode.